framework/commerce/new-provider.md, before:

# Adding a new Commerce Provider

A commerce provider is a headless e-commerce platform that integrates with the [Commerce Framework](./README.md). Right now we have the following providers:

- BigCommerce ([framework/bigcommerce](../bigcommerce))
- Saleor ([framework/saleor](../saleor))
- Shopify ([framework/shopify](../shopify))

Adding a commerce provider means adding a new folder in `framework` with a folder structure like the next one:

- `api`
  - index.ts
- `product`
  - usePrice
  - useSearch
  - getProduct
  - getAllProducts
- `wishlist`
  - useWishlist
  - useAddItem
  - useRemoveItem
- `auth`
  - useLogin
  - useLogout
  - useSignup
- `customer`
  - useCustomer
  - getCustomerId
  - getCustomerWistlist
- `cart`
  - useCart
  - useAddItem
  - useRemoveItem
  - useUpdateItem
- `env.template`
- `index.ts`
- `provider.ts`
- `commerce.config.json`
- `next.config.js`
- `README.md`

`provider.ts` exports a provider object with handlers for the [Commerce Hooks](./README.md#commerce-hooks) and `api/index.ts` exports a Node.js provider for the [Commerce API](./README.md#commerce-api)

> **Important:** We use TypeScript for every provider and expect its usage for every new one.

The app imports from the provider directly instead of the core commerce folder (`framework/commerce`), but all providers are interchangeable and to achieve it every provider always has to implement the core types and helpers.

The provider folder should only depend on `framework/commerce` and dependencies in the main `package.json`. In the future we'll move the `framework` folder to a package that can be shared easily for multiple apps.

## Adding the provider hooks

Using BigCommerce as an example. The first thing to do is export a `CommerceProvider` component that includes a `provider` object with all the handlers that can be used for hooks:

```tsx
import type { ReactNode } from 'react'
import {
  CommerceConfig,
  CommerceProvider as CoreCommerceProvider,
  useCommerce as useCoreCommerce,
} from '@commerce'
import { bigcommerceProvider } from './provider'
import type { BigcommerceProvider } from './provider'

export { bigcommerceProvider }
export type { BigcommerceProvider }

export const bigcommerceConfig: CommerceConfig = {
  locale: 'en-us',
  cartCookie: 'bc_cartId',
}

export type BigcommerceConfig = Partial<CommerceConfig>

export type BigcommerceProps = {
  children?: ReactNode
  locale: string
} & BigcommerceConfig

export function CommerceProvider({ children, ...config }: BigcommerceProps) {
  return (
    <CoreCommerceProvider
      provider={bigcommerceProvider}
      config={{ ...bigcommerceConfig, ...config }}
    >
      {children}
    </CoreCommerceProvider>
  )
}

export const useCommerce = () => useCoreCommerce<BigcommerceProvider>()
```

The exported types and components extend from the core ones exported by `@commerce`, which refers to `framework/commerce`.

The `bigcommerceProvider` object looks like this:

```tsx
import { handler as useCart } from './cart/use-cart'
import { handler as useAddItem } from './cart/use-add-item'
import { handler as useUpdateItem } from './cart/use-update-item'
import { handler as useRemoveItem } from './cart/use-remove-item'

import { handler as useWishlist } from './wishlist/use-wishlist'
import { handler as useWishlistAddItem } from './wishlist/use-add-item'
import { handler as useWishlistRemoveItem } from './wishlist/use-remove-item'

import { handler as useCustomer } from './customer/use-customer'
import { handler as useSearch } from './product/use-search'

import { handler as useLogin } from './auth/use-login'
import { handler as useLogout } from './auth/use-logout'
import { handler as useSignup } from './auth/use-signup'

import fetcher from './fetcher'

export const bigcommerceProvider = {
  locale: 'en-us',
  cartCookie: 'bc_cartId',
  fetcher,
  cart: { useCart, useAddItem, useUpdateItem, useRemoveItem },
  wishlist: {
    useWishlist,
    useAddItem: useWishlistAddItem,
    useRemoveItem: useWishlistRemoveItem,
  },
  customer: { useCustomer },
  products: { useSearch },
  auth: { useLogin, useLogout, useSignup },
}

export type BigcommerceProvider = typeof bigcommerceProvider
```

The provider object, in this case `bigcommerceProvider`, has to match the `Provider` type defined in [framework/commerce](./index.ts).

A hook handler, like `useCart`, looks like this:

```tsx
import { useMemo } from 'react'
import { SWRHook } from '@commerce/utils/types'
import useCart, { UseCart, FetchCartInput } from '@commerce/cart/use-cart'
import { normalizeCart } from '../lib/normalize'
import type { Cart } from '../types'

export default useCart as UseCart<typeof handler>

export const handler: SWRHook<
  Cart | null,
  {},
  FetchCartInput,
  { isEmpty?: boolean }
> = {
  fetchOptions: {
    url: '/api/cart',
    method: 'GET',
  },
  async fetcher({ input: { cartId }, options, fetch }) {
    const data = cartId ? await fetch(options) : null
    return data && normalizeCart(data)
  },
  useHook:
    ({ useData }) =>
    (input) => {
      const response = useData({
        swrOptions: { revalidateOnFocus: false, ...input?.swrOptions },
      })

      return useMemo(
        () =>
          Object.create(response, {
            isEmpty: {
              get() {
                return (response.data?.lineItems.length ?? 0) <= 0
              },
              enumerable: true,
            },
          }),
        [response]
      )
    },
}
```

In the case of data fetching hooks like `useCart` each handler has to implement the `SWRHook` type that's defined in the core types. For mutations it's the `MutationHook`, e.g for `useAddItem`:

```tsx
import { useCallback } from 'react'
import type { MutationHook } from '@commerce/utils/types'
import { CommerceError } from '@commerce/utils/errors'
import useAddItem, { UseAddItem } from '@commerce/cart/use-add-item'
import { normalizeCart } from '../lib/normalize'
import type {
  Cart,
  BigcommerceCart,
  CartItemBody,
  AddCartItemBody,
} from '../types'
import useCart from './use-cart'

export default useAddItem as UseAddItem<typeof handler>

export const handler: MutationHook<Cart, {}, CartItemBody> = {
  fetchOptions: {
    url: '/api/cart',
    method: 'POST',
  },
  async fetcher({ input: item, options, fetch }) {
    if (
      item.quantity &&
      (!Number.isInteger(item.quantity) || item.quantity! < 1)
    ) {
      throw new CommerceError({
        message: 'The item quantity has to be a valid integer greater than 0',
      })
    }

    const data = await fetch<BigcommerceCart, AddCartItemBody>({
      ...options,
      body: { item },
    })

    return normalizeCart(data)
  },
  useHook:
    ({ fetch }) =>
    () => {
      const { mutate } = useCart()

      return useCallback(
        async function addItem(input) {
          const data = await fetch({ input })
          await mutate(data, false)
          return data
        },
        [fetch, mutate]
      )
    },
}
```

## Adding the Node.js provider API

TODO

> The commerce API is currently going through a refactor in https://github.com/vercel/commerce/pull/252 - We'll update the docs once the API is released.

Commit message:

Update README.md to include information on how to add a custom provider (#250)
* Update README.md

* Updated commerce readme

Co-authored-by: Luis Alvarez D <luis@vercel.com>

framework/commerce/new-provider.md, after:

# Adding a new Commerce Provider

A commerce provider is a headless e-commerce platform that integrates with the [Commerce Framework](./README.md). Right now we have the following providers:

- BigCommerce ([framework/bigcommerce](../bigcommerce))
- Saleor ([framework/saleor](../saleor))
- Shopify ([framework/shopify](../shopify))

Adding a commerce provider means adding a new folder in `framework` with a folder structure like the next one:

- `api`
  - index.ts
- `product`
  - usePrice
  - useSearch
  - getProduct
  - getAllProducts
- `wishlist`
  - useWishlist
  - useAddItem
  - useRemoveItem
- `auth`
  - useLogin
  - useLogout
  - useSignup
- `customer`
  - useCustomer
  - getCustomerId
  - getCustomerWistlist
- `cart`
  - useCart
  - useAddItem
  - useRemoveItem
  - useUpdateItem
- `env.template`
- `index.ts`
- `provider.ts`
- `commerce.config.json`
- `next.config.js`
- `README.md`

`provider.ts` exports a provider object with handlers for the [Commerce Hooks](./README.md#commerce-hooks) and `api/index.ts` exports a Node.js provider for the [Commerce API](./README.md#commerce-api)

> **Important:** We use TypeScript for every provider and expect its usage for every new one.

The app imports from the provider directly instead of the core commerce folder (`framework/commerce`), but all providers are interchangeable and to achieve it every provider always has to implement the core types and helpers.

The provider folder should only depend on `framework/commerce` and dependencies in the main `package.json`. In the future we'll move the `framework` folder to a package that can be shared easily for multiple apps.

## Updating the list of known providers

Open [./config.js](./config.js) and add the provider name to the list in `PROVIDERS`.

Then, open [/.env.template](/.env.template) and add the provider name in the first line.

## Adding the provider hooks

Using BigCommerce as an example. The first thing to do is export a `CommerceProvider` component that includes a `provider` object with all the handlers that can be used for hooks:

```tsx
import type { ReactNode } from 'react'
import {
  CommerceConfig,
  CommerceProvider as CoreCommerceProvider,
  useCommerce as useCoreCommerce,
} from '@commerce'
import { bigcommerceProvider } from './provider'
import type { BigcommerceProvider } from './provider'

export { bigcommerceProvider }
export type { BigcommerceProvider }

export const bigcommerceConfig: CommerceConfig = {
  locale: 'en-us',
  cartCookie: 'bc_cartId',
}

export type BigcommerceConfig = Partial<CommerceConfig>

export type BigcommerceProps = {
  children?: ReactNode
  locale: string
} & BigcommerceConfig

export function CommerceProvider({ children, ...config }: BigcommerceProps) {
  return (
    <CoreCommerceProvider
      provider={bigcommerceProvider}
      config={{ ...bigcommerceConfig, ...config }}
    >
      {children}
    </CoreCommerceProvider>
  )
}

export const useCommerce = () => useCoreCommerce<BigcommerceProvider>()
```

The exported types and components extend from the core ones exported by `@commerce`, which refers to `framework/commerce`.

The `bigcommerceProvider` object looks like this:

```tsx
import { handler as useCart } from './cart/use-cart'
import { handler as useAddItem } from './cart/use-add-item'
import { handler as useUpdateItem } from './cart/use-update-item'
import { handler as useRemoveItem } from './cart/use-remove-item'

import { handler as useWishlist } from './wishlist/use-wishlist'
import { handler as useWishlistAddItem } from './wishlist/use-add-item'
import { handler as useWishlistRemoveItem } from './wishlist/use-remove-item'

import { handler as useCustomer } from './customer/use-customer'
import { handler as useSearch } from './product/use-search'

import { handler as useLogin } from './auth/use-login'
import { handler as useLogout } from './auth/use-logout'
import { handler as useSignup } from './auth/use-signup'

import fetcher from './fetcher'

export const bigcommerceProvider = {
  locale: 'en-us',
  cartCookie: 'bc_cartId',
  fetcher,
  cart: { useCart, useAddItem, useUpdateItem, useRemoveItem },
  wishlist: {
    useWishlist,
    useAddItem: useWishlistAddItem,
    useRemoveItem: useWishlistRemoveItem,
  },
  customer: { useCustomer },
  products: { useSearch },
  auth: { useLogin, useLogout, useSignup },
}

export type BigcommerceProvider = typeof bigcommerceProvider
```

The provider object, in this case `bigcommerceProvider`, has to match the `Provider` type defined in [framework/commerce](./index.ts).

A hook handler, like `useCart`, looks like this:

```tsx
import { useMemo } from 'react'
import { SWRHook } from '@commerce/utils/types'
import useCart, { UseCart, FetchCartInput } from '@commerce/cart/use-cart'
import { normalizeCart } from '../lib/normalize'
import type { Cart } from '../types'

export default useCart as UseCart<typeof handler>

export const handler: SWRHook<
  Cart | null,
  {},
  FetchCartInput,
  { isEmpty?: boolean }
> = {
  fetchOptions: {
    url: '/api/cart',
    method: 'GET',
  },
  async fetcher({ input: { cartId }, options, fetch }) {
    const data = cartId ? await fetch(options) : null
    return data && normalizeCart(data)
  },
  useHook:
    ({ useData }) =>
    (input) => {
      const response = useData({
        swrOptions: { revalidateOnFocus: false, ...input?.swrOptions },
      })

      return useMemo(
        () =>
          Object.create(response, {
            isEmpty: {
              get() {
                return (response.data?.lineItems.length ?? 0) <= 0
              },
              enumerable: true,
            },
          }),
        [response]
      )
    },
}
```

In the case of data fetching hooks like `useCart` each handler has to implement the `SWRHook` type that's defined in the core types. For mutations it's the `MutationHook`, e.g for `useAddItem`:

```tsx
import { useCallback } from 'react'
import type { MutationHook } from '@commerce/utils/types'
import { CommerceError } from '@commerce/utils/errors'
import useAddItem, { UseAddItem } from '@commerce/cart/use-add-item'
import { normalizeCart } from '../lib/normalize'
import type {
  Cart,
  BigcommerceCart,
  CartItemBody,
  AddCartItemBody,
} from '../types'
import useCart from './use-cart'

export default useAddItem as UseAddItem<typeof handler>

export const handler: MutationHook<Cart, {}, CartItemBody> = {
  fetchOptions: {
    url: '/api/cart',
    method: 'POST',
  },
  async fetcher({ input: item, options, fetch }) {
    if (
      item.quantity &&
      (!Number.isInteger(item.quantity) || item.quantity! < 1)
    ) {
      throw new CommerceError({
        message: 'The item quantity has to be a valid integer greater than 0',
      })
    }

    const data = await fetch<BigcommerceCart, AddCartItemBody>({
      ...options,
      body: { item },
    })

    return normalizeCart(data)
  },
  useHook:
    ({ fetch }) =>
    () => {
      const { mutate } = useCart()

      return useCallback(
        async function addItem(input) {
          const data = await fetch({ input })
          await mutate(data, false)
          return data
        },
        [fetch, mutate]
      )
    },
}
```

## Adding the Node.js provider API

TODO

> The commerce API is currently going through a refactor in https://github.com/vercel/commerce/pull/252 - We'll update the docs once the API is released.
